Purpose The presence of noise in medical ultrasound images leads to significant degradation of image quality and interferes with the accuracy of disease diagnosis. Conventional denoising algorithms are difficult to retain the texture information of the original image while denoising, and they are time-consuming with poor generalization. The aim of the present study is to improve the effectiveness of medical ultrasound image denoising by incorporating the lightweight attention mechanism.
Methods A lightweight attention denoise-convolutional neural network (LAD-CNN) is proposed in the present study. Two different lightweight attention blocks: the lightweight channel attention block (LCA) and the lightweight large kernel attention block (LLA) are concatenated into the downsampling stage and the upsampling stage, respectively. A skip connection is included before the upsampling layer to alleviate the problem of gradient vanishing during backpropagation. The effectiveness of all models is evaluated based on both subjective visual effects and objective evaluation metrics.
Results The proposed model outperforms other models with the highest PSNR and SSIM values at all noise levels. In the brachial plexus ultrasound image test, our model's average PSNR is 0.15 higher at low noise levels and 0.33 higher at high noise levels compared to the suboptimal model. In the fetal ultrasound image test, our model's average PSNR is 0.23 higher at low noise levels and 0.20 higher at high noise levels compared to the suboptimal model.
Conclusion This study suggests that the proposed LAD-CNN model is more efficient in denoising and preserving image details compared to both conventional denoising algorithms and existing deep learning algorithms.
